---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Introduction
title: Introduction
stop_id: '0'
permalink: "/stops/0"
audio_file: 0.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '0'
---

## Eric Bruce

Welcome to Martin Luther: Art and the Reformation. I'm Eric Bruce, Head of Visitor Experience here at Mia. I will be your guide.

This audio tour will take you through the galleries and provide insight into twenty two remarkable objects chosen specifically for you by the exhibition curators. We have brought together a wonderful team of world-renowned scholars, archaeologists, curators, and theologians to share stories and ideas. We believe Martin Luther: Art and the Reformation will not only inspire you, but also challenge your thinking in surprising ways. We are very excited to be able to bring you this once-in-a-lifetime experience.

The tour stops are numbered 1 to 22, but you can listen to them in any order you choose and move back and forth through the gallery. A number is posted next to the artwork that corresponds to the audio stops.

Though the Reformation was over 500 years ago, it changed the Western world in powerful ways, still in effect today. We want to give you the opportunity to explore the complexity of the Reformation Movement more deeply. So, we've created additional layers of information for some of the audio stops. I will present you with the focus of these options during the tour.

Listen to as many or as few as you like. The audio tour is self-guided, and you create the experience tailored to your interests. We will begin with an introduction from Kaywin Feldman, the Duncan and Nivin MacMillan, Director and President of the Minneapolis Institute of Art. Start by pressing number 1. I'll join you on the other side.
