---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Indulgence Chest
title: Indulgence Chest
stop_id: '10'
permalink: "/stops/10"
audio_file: 010.mp3
substops:
- 10A
- 10B
parent_stop: '10'
---

## Eric Bruce

This is what started the tsunami of change that was Martin Luther's Reformation, the Indulgence Chest. Tom outlines the intriguing political background of how indulgences got into Germany.

## Tom Rassieur

After Luther received his doctorate in 1512, he was busy in Wittenberg teaching and studying. Meanwhile, there were bigger things going on in Rome. In 1514, Cardinal Albrecht of Brandenburg, whom we’ve met as the donor of beautiful objects to the Halberstadt Cathedral, cut a deal with Pope Leo the X.

Cardinal Albrecht of Brandenburg was very interested in becoming the Archbishop of Mainz. He was already the Archbishop of Magdeburg and the Administrator of the Halberstadt Cathedral. These are two offices. And it was actually against Church rules to have two offices, and for him to who want three was really quite ambitious, but he really wanted this seat because if he became the Archbishop of Mainz, he would also become an Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, and have one of those scare seven votes that elects the Holy Roman Emperor, a very powerful position, a lucrative one because people paid bribes to help influence your vote. This was a real political power play on the part of Albrecht.

Leo was willing to make a deal with Albrecht because Leo wanted money, even though he was a Medici, one of the richest families in Italy, he was trying to build Saint Peter's Basilica. This was a very expensive undertaking. So he saw in Cardinal Albrecht’s ambition an opportunity to get money for his project. Leo told Albert, if Albert would give Leo that money, he could become the Archbishop of Mainz. The problem was that Albert didn't have the money. So they came up with a solution, Albert would borrow the money from the Fugger banking family, a very powerful, rich family in Germany, and he would give the money to Leo. In return, Leo would give Albert a concession to sell indulgences in Germany.

Indulgences are like get out of jail free cards. Even if a faithful Catholic has been forgiven of sins, that person is still liable to be punished in the afterlife for those sins, and that punishment was to go to purgatory; it's like a long-term time out, you had to wait and wait and wait before you can get into heaven. Traditionally, indulgences could be earned by taking pilgrimages or saying certain prayers, performing acts of faith, but now a person could pay money for the indulgence, skip purgatory and go straight to heaven. The upshot was that Albert and Leo struck the deal. Albert went back to Germany where he hired one of the greatest salesmen of all time, a man named Johann Tetzel to go around selling the indulgences in Germany.

The indulgences didn't say anything about their deal. What they said was that the money paid would go towards the building of Saint Peter. So, it would be like a good work, because you were helping the Pope to accomplish his mission. And the indulgences could be for various lengths of time. You could even buy one for another member of your family. You could buy one for a whole group. Here in the exhibition, we have an indulgence for an entire convent. So, Tetzel went to work. And he was tremendously successful. Indulgence chest such as the one you see in this room were filled to the brim with money, with coins. And Tetzel had a little couplet that he would say; in English; it goes something like this, "When the coin in the chest rings, the soul to Heaven springs," and this was a tremendous incentive for people to buy the indulgences, and they literally sold like hotcakes.

Now, this was a problem for secular rulers in the Empire in Germany, because they saw these chests full of money being filled up and carted away. And of course, half the money was going to Albrecht, and the other half was going to Leo, maybe there were some skimming along the way, I don't really know, but nonetheless this is what was going on. And so, you had a political crises and the rise of a new power in Northern Germany, that being Albrecht, and you had for some including Martin Luther, a spiritual crises in the sale of indulgences instead of the earning of indulgences.

So in 1517, when Luther posted his 95 Theses arguing against the validity of indulgences, he unknowingly walked into a trap, because he was arguing against the financial activities of his own boss, the Cardinal. So when the Cardinal saw Luther's 95 Theses, it wasn't only for theological reasons that he might have objected, it was also for reasons of governance and for reasons of financial self-interest.

## Eric Bruce

Press 10A for the Catholic explanation of indulgences from Johan van Parys of the Basilica of St. Mary. Mary Jane Haemig is a Professor of Church History and Director of the Reformation Research program at Luther Seminary in St. Paul. At 10B, you can hear her explain Martin Luther's idea of indulgences.
