---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Luther as Monk
title: Luther as Monk
stop_id: '11'
permalink: "/stops/11"
audio_file: 011.mp3
substops:
- 11A
- 11B
parent_stop: '11'
hero_images:
  - path: image11.png
    alt_text: |
      Lucas Cranach the Elder
      Martin Luther as an Augustinian Monk, 1520
      Engraving
  - path: image25.png
    alt_text: |
      After Lucas Cranach the Elder
      Martin Luther as an Augustinian Monk, 1520
      Woodcut
---

## Eric Bruce

Cranach gave us the images of Martin Luther and the reformation that are still used 500 hundred years later. Joanna Lindell, Director and Curator of the Collection of Religious Art at Thrivent Financial takes us through the first portraits of Luther that Cranach created.

## Joanna Lindell

This first image made by Cranach in 1520 is made very specifically to present Luther as that pious, devout Augustinian Monk, which he was. So, his sort of sunken cheeks indicate that he was slightly emaciated, and his tonsure – his Augustinian tonsure is there, his very simple monk's habit; all of these things conveyed a sense that this is a very devout catholic monk, and he is very focused on his sort of his life – his monastic life, and also his gazes, this beautifully direct gaze, and he looks very clear, you know, strong personality in this image. He really did look like this during this time period. This was a fairly accurate portrayal.

So this image is made, and it has Cranach's wonderful sort of early monogram mark at the bottom with the serpent. But then he goes onto create this other image in 1520, which actually does become something that is widely printed and distributed. And it's a really similar image of Luther, but it's different in that he is set in this niche behind him, which gives a little bit more definition kind of to the image, but he also has a slightly softer look to his face. His gaze is a little bit different. He just looks a bit gentler, which I think goes in line with sort of again, why were these images created sort of to convey the image and personality of this important reformation figure.

## Eric Bruce

11A will explore the images that helped shaped the power of Martin Luther's public persona. One of the most important tools fueling the reformation was Gutenberg's printing press, invented in 1440. 11B explores why.
