---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: 95 Theses
title: 95 Theses
stop_id: '12'
permalink: "/stops/12"
audio_file: 012.mp3
substops:
- 12A
parent_stop: '12'
hero_images:
  - path: image29.png
    alt_text: |
      Martin Luther
      Resolutiones Disputationum de Indulgentiarum Virtute
      [Wittenberg: Rhau-Grunenberg], 1518
---

## Eric Bruce

Mary Jane Haemig of Luther Seminary is going to tell you the amazing story of Martin Luther’s 95 Theses; considered the spark that started the Reformation

## Mary Jane Haemig

Indulgences were not being sold in Wittenberg. What was happening is that they were being sold in nearby territories, and some of the people from Wittenberg were walking over, buying indulgences from Tencel and coming back to Wittenberg. And probably showing their indulgence to Luther: look what I have! Indulgences already were already controversial in Germany. They’d been controversial for at least 100 years.

Luther was convinced that God’s mercy is free. He was convinced that the only punishment that the Pope could remit would be a punishment that the Pope himself had imposed. God is the only one who can remit God’s punishments, and so he thought the whole indulgence trade was very, very questionable. Indulgences led people down the wrong path. He felt they were being deluded. They were wasting their money. They came to think that they could buy God’s mercy. They came to think that the Church controlled God’s mercy. Luther thought the Church announces God’s mercy; it does not control God’s mercy. And he had raised some questions about it already in 1517. He had preached a sermon in which he had raised some questions. And perhaps it wasn’t then so surprising that spurred on by the happenings in neighboring territories, he decided to post some theses for debate.

Certainly when Martin Luther posted his 95 Theses, he had no intention of attacking the papacy. He had no intention of splitting the Church. He was posting theses for an academic debate. That was the common way of doing things. There was a subject of interest and he wrote up his theses. He posted them on what was the university bulletin board, and probably was very surprised at the reaction. There were all sorts of theses posted for debate at German universities. Why would they be noticed at all? But these somehow resonated. They weren’t really for popular consumption. They were for university, they were for academic, discussion. Writing in Latin was for an academic audience. Writing in German was for a popular audience. 

The piece that Luther wrote for popular consumption came in the next year, in 1518. It was called “The Sermon on Indulgence and Grace,” and it was a German language defense of Luther’s teaching on indulgences. And that little pamphlet, eight pages long, was published and republished, and became the popular version. They were theses about indulgences. They also touched on issues of authority (papal authority), touched on issues of the message of the Church, but in no way do the theses represent Luther’s mature theology. 

Now how did he get from 1517 to his mature theology? Well, he once said later on that he never would have been forced to think through so many of these issues deeply and thoroughly, if the Roman Church had not been so resistant to his criticism of indulgences. 

## Eric Bruce

In stop 12A Mary Jane Haemig continues the fascinating story of the 95 Theses.
