---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Luther as Saint
title: Luther as Monk
stop_id: 12A
permalink: "/stops/12A"
audio_file: 012A.mp3
substops:
- 12A
- 12B
parent_stop: '12'
hero_images:
  - path: image12.png
    alt_text: |
      Hans Baldung Grien
      Martin Luther with a Dove, 1521
      Woodcut
---

## Joanna Lindell

I absolutely love this image. It's – in part, I love this image because it was really one of the most popular images of Luther during the Reformation. And that was partly because it was printed in, I think, ten different books during the early-midyears of the Reformation. And I think one of the reasons why it was printed so frequently is because it was a very evocative and actually sensational image, because it does present Luther as a saint, essentially, and that was a very bold choice on the part of the artist, Hans Baldung Grien.

This was originally made to illustrate a book called _Acta Et Res Gesta_; it was _The Acts and Deeds of Dr. Martin Luther_. So Baldung's portrait was really made specifically – very, very specifically to be, this is the image of the man about whom you are about to read in this book. So, the hugely revolutionary thing that he does, I should say, you know, sensational thing that the artist does here is putting the dove, the Holy Spirit above Luther. That's suggesting direct divine influence. He has also surrounded his head with this radiant nimbus of divine light, which is a halo. And in Western art history, the halo had historically been reserved only for saints and apostles.

This is really specific symbolism and imagery that's showing Luther as a saint. That becomes rather complicated because Luther would very famously oppose the veneration of saints, but really the saints were a part of daily life for most Christians for centuries. Different towns and cities had patron saints, different concepts and ideas and journeys had patron saints. So, that's all sort of a way of saying that while there were lots of concerns over sort of worship of saints, or that veneration was going too far in daily life, it's also that you can't just get rid of a concept like that quickly. And I think many people didn't want to.

Luther was continually compared also to certain saints, Saint George, Saint Jerome, because both men famously translated scripture. So, the notion of presenting Luther as a Saint is really quite complex, but also very simple, it's this message that this man is divinely inspired. And he is a part of this culture and society; we should listen to him, we should listen to his words, he is also – in this image, his hand is touching the open book. So, he is touching scripture. The idea is to take it even further, not only is he divinely inspired from, you know, above by the Holy Spirit, but also from scripture. It's also a reminder of Luther's teachings and adherence to "Sola Scriptura," his belief that scripture was the sole authority for Christians.

This image was specifically written about at the Diet of Worms, and the image was banned. Books were banned and so forth. So, even though this was a very, very popular image and reprinted many times, there’s a lot of copies that were destroyed or defaced or damaged. It's exciting you know to have a good copy. That's another thing that makes it my favorite image, the idea that a lot of people saw this image. And I think connected through this figure, through this image, but it's such a good one.
