---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Printing Press
title: Luther as Monk
stop_id: 12B
permalink: "/stops/12B"
audio_file: 012B.mp3
substops:
- 12A
- 12B
parent_stop: '12'
---

## Mary Jane Haemig

The printing press was a technology that Luther and his fellow reformers knew how to use. But it wasn't simply the press, you know, the mechanical nature of being able to produce multiple copies of something. It was the fact that Luther wrote quite a bit in the vernacular. He wrote in German. So he aimed his message at literate Germans, and not solely at an academic audience, for which he would write in Latin. I know he could write in Latin too. He was fluent in Latin, and he certainly did write in Latin for academic audiences, but it was this whole matter of writing in German that put him ahead. And so he could turn out short pamphlets, like the sermon on indulgences and grace, or some other sermons from that year which may or may not have been preached, but they were short messages.

The people who read his message often would read it aloud to others, people who couldn't read, or they would absorb it and convey it in their own way. So, it wasn't simply the technology of the press, it was how Luther knew how to use it.

Luther worked with printers to produce works that were visually appealing. He didn't want his work simply printed. He wanted them printed in a way that made them easy for people to follow. You know, not just one line after another; paragraph marks, pictures, different types of fonts to make the reading easier. He was sensitive to that.
