---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Bible Translation
title: Junker Jörg
stop_id: 13A
permalink: "/stops/13A"
audio_file: 013A.mp3
substops:
- 13A
- 13B
- 13C
parent_stop: '13'
---

## Louis Nebelsick

The cornerstone of Luther's Reformation revolution is translating that Bible and getting it into massive print, so everybody can read it. Nobody had been reading this thing. This thing was being written in inaccessible languages for most of the people, yeah.

The upper-class could read this, but it was largely it wasn't done and Martin Luther said, "Look, we've got to go back to the basics." Martin Luther being the Professor again, yes, and very much the scholar saying, "Look, let's get back to the book. Yeah. You've got to read the Scripture, and the girls too, they got to read it too, yes." And this means for the first time for all social classes, there is universal schooling because you can't be a Christian if you can't read. Now this is news before that, I mean, in early Medieval Europe the kings couldn't read. It was only a few priests and scholars who could read this. The reading business was a very elitist thing, and he actually – I mean this is also a legacy of Martin Luther, I forgot to say this, he invented the German language. He invented, it was his idea, the German language.

Maybe he was speaking German, but German was cut up in a series of dialects that were extremely different from each other. He took the language of the Saxon bureaucracy, the Saxon bureaucratic language, and he started inventing words and stuff, and he invented modern German, High Germans as it's called, it was his invention. And because he had such a focus on education, this is what people learned. He was very scrupulous in his translations. He would do amazing things like when he heard about jewels in the Old Testament, he wasn't sure what they were describing, and he was asking friends of his to send him minerals and things like that, so he could find words for them, yes, and he’d go to great pains to do this, and he was brilliant. His German was absolutely brilliant.

His hymns are still, "A Mighty Fortress is Our God," yes, you can't walk through Wittenberg without hearing that once a day, yes. These are stunning pieces of literature that he wrote. And so, he was a linguistic genius at the right place at the right time. The middle-class was growing. So we are having an increasing literate population, and we also have the printing press, which means you can transport your ideas very, very quickly, lightening speed, yes. It's interesting that during Martin Luther's time, Wittenberg had the highest population density of printers in the whole of Europe, yes. There is a print shop in every corner and every time Martin Luther would let off his sermon, he would write it and then it would be hot on the press. And this was a whole new exciting world. It was like immediate change – I think it’s very much like the Internet now.
