---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Law and Grace
title: Law and Grace
stop_id: '14'
permalink: "/stops/14"
audio_file: 014.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '14'
hero_images:
  - path: ext_201512180009.jpg
    alt_text: |
      Lucas Cranach the Elder
      German, 1472-1553
      Law and Grace, 1529
      Mixed techniques on limewood
---

## Eric Bruce

This is one of the most famous paintings created by Lucas Cranach. It shares Luther's theology in vibrant emotional images. Louis Nebelsick takes us on a journey through the painting.

## Louis Nebelsick

Let's say you talk about “Law and Grace.” It's a sermon done in paint. You can see that the two sides is the Tree of Life: barren on the one side, side of law, flourishing on the other side, the side of grace, yes. Side of law, you have a frightened sinner being driven to hell by demons. The Old Testament prophets are powerless to help him, yes. God will judge, but what can God do? He must judge badly because people sinned and they sin every day, and so they must go to hell.

It's a very frightened scary world that you have there. On the other side of this tree, you have John the Baptist leading the soul to believe in God. There's a bond. It's almost scary where you see the blood spurting from Christ's wound into the heart of the sinner, yes. There's a bond between you and God.

Christ triumphant emerging from his grave, his victory over death, this bond of love between the sinner and God who is willing to give his grace, yes. If you look at these pictures very carefully, you can see that there're bridges between the two sides. Yeah, you can see that on the one hand, there is this picture of Moses leading his people to worship God's gift of the brazen serpent, yes, and thus escaped the plague that belief is important. Because the serpent saw us from the tower shaped cross prefigures the crucifixion. Prophets, who are incapable of saving the sinner, prophesize the coming of Christ, so also there is a bridge there. And there's versions of this painting done in print and in other media well into the 18th century, yes. It gave people also an image where they could see what the main tenets of belief were. We are talking about the time when people needed these kind of optical sermons, because they weren't really reading as well as they could, this whole process of universal education was at its beginnings. And so, you needed to be able to sort of talk people through it, you know, a little bit you know, like your comic book or something like that.

And that's why these “Law and Grace” is not a painterly work at all. If you look at saying, "Oh, goodness, what's happening there," there are these different scales and you have the one picture there, next picture, next picture, next one, but it wasn't considered to be a painting that would make painterly sense or show perspective, and things like that. It was you will go to hell pursued by demons unless you achieve grace by belief in God. That is shown by a series; a very, very crystal-clear images.

I think we should look at these pictures as a naïve believer in those days, and you looked on one side and you saw these incredibly frightening demons chasing the sky to eternal torture, and that was scary. And if you looked at this other picture and you saw crucified savior suffering, and this bond of blood desponding you to Him, and this was moving. I can imagine weeping when you saw this picture.

When you read Martin Luther, you realize he was frightened and he really believes that there was God's love out there, and he thought that the Catholic Churches he saw it, the traditional church was not only not helping people, stopping people from believing. And that's why he got up and whacked that thesis on the door, yes, and said, "No, it's not working."
