---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Gotha Altar
title: Gotha Altar
stop_id: '15'
permalink: "/stops/15"
audio_file: 015.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '15'
hero_images:
  - path: ext_201512180007.jpg
    alt_text: |
      Gotha Altar, 1539–1541
      Mixed media on fir panel
      Heinrich Füllmaurer, workshop
      German, about 1505-1546
---

## Eric Bruce

Like _Law and Grace_, this breathtaking altar uses pictures and words to create an experience of the Bible. Dr. Tomoko Emmerling will share her insights.

## Dr. Tomoko Emmerling

This is the so-called Gotha Panel Altar, and it consists of 14 wings and a central panel; on these many wings, three from the creation, the other showing scenes from the life of Christ. It was made around 1540, and the interesting thing is that every single scene on the altar is being accompanied by a text from the New Testament. So there's always the scene in writing and the scene in the painting, and this fits very well to the characteristic of Protestant artwork, a combination of text and painting or picture, text and picture.

And what is also characteristic Protestant is that the people don't have halos like the Catholic saints have. And there are even more texts, not only the text from the New Testament, but also rhymes, verses on other parts of the altar, so people should look at it, read the pictures and read the text. And it is kind of a huge picture Bible; a monumental picture Bible.

We don't know if it was ever used as an altar proper. We don't think that it was ever used in a Church as you would expect from an altar, but it is mentioned in the inventories of the accounts of Gotha in 1648.
