---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Junker Jörg-the story
title: Junker Jörg-the story
stop_id: '16'
permalink: "/stops/16"
audio_file: 016.mp3
substops:
- 16A
- 16B
- 16C
parent_stop: '16'
---

## Eric Bruce

In 1521 Luther had been declared an outlaw. Joanna Lindell, Director and Curator of Thrivent’s Religious Art Collection, tells the exciting story of this image.

## Joanna Lindell

After the Diet at Worms, Luther is declared an outlaw, and Friedrich the Elector of Saxony arranges for this kidnapping, sort of to take Luther and to take him into safe hiding. And Luther gets pretty short notice of this. I think Lucas Cranach is the person who alerts him to that.

He’s kidnapped. He’s brought to the Wartburg, and during this time period and sort of directly after, so this is when he’s translating the New Testament into German. And in December of 1521, he’s corresponding with colleagues in Wittenberg, and he actually hears about the very destructive iconoclasm that’s going on. And Cranach urges him to come back to sort of deal with this, because there’s other people who’ve been speaking about this and really passionately saying images are not good. And people start to destroy churches and it’s quite terrible and dramatic. 

So, Luther has this sort of disguise because he’s in hiding, and there’s a very real possibility that he could be killed. So this is really a disguised image of Luther. So if we look at the images of Luther as an Augustinian monk, which are made just one and two years earlier, this is a very different image. His hair has grown out, he’s got this long beard, and this is a persona known as ‘Luther as Junker Jörg,’ and it really means George the Knight. And that is a reference to (more issues about saints here) Saint George was a saint who famously rescued a princess, and killed a dragon. And the story for Saint George is that right before he kills the dragon, he says a prayer and signs himself with the crucifixion, and then he successfully kills the dragon. So, the notion that Luther is slaying the dragon of abuses in the Church, is a very powerful one that resonates with people at the time.

So he leaves basically in December to just ty to address the turmoil that’s being incited back in Wittenberg. This image then is created when he’s there. What’s kind of funny about it is he is in disguise, I think in earnest, but the fact that a lot of images are made depicting him this way mean it’s also a piece of propaganda during the Reformation. So, the story becomes part of his story, and I think that notion of Luther having to be in hiding, and having this colorful disguise, was a really interesting, compelling story for people to hear and tell, too. So, not such a great secret, maybe. 

## Eric Bruce

While in hiding, Luther began translating the New Testament to German. Louis Nevelsick tells us surprising details about this historic and revolutionary act in 16A. In 16B, Armin Kunst offers more insights about the translation of Luther’s Bible and the biting images included in it. In 16C, Joanna Lindell tells us about the difficult time for art and artists in the Reformation.
