---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Luther translates the Bible more
title: Luther translates the Bible more
stop_id: 16B
permalink: "/stops/16B"
audio_file: 016B.mp3
substops:
- 16A
- 16B
- 16C
parent_stop: '16'
---

## Armin Kuntz

What is the big publication event of the period? It is Luther translating the Bible. So, Luther is captured in the Wartburg, translating New Testament, and it gets published in September 1522. So the first part of Luther's translation, he starts from the back, he starts with the New Testament. So within the New Testament images, it is the apocalypse that gets illustrated with what Cranach creates the woodcuts for the New Testament.

And then this application became such a runaway success that the first edition sold out incredibly quickly and in the same year, December of 1522 the second edition was already published. And there was one little detail that actually changed, because who knows who it was, maybe it was the Elector himself who said guys you know just kind of cool it a bit, just don’t overdo it because there are lots of monster images, the negative images, the dragon, the devil, who in the September Testament, i.e. in the first edition images wears the Papal tiara. So he wears the Papal crown. And in the December one, the block has changed. The woodcutter went back in there and altered it to just a simple crown.

On one hand Frederick the Wise, the Elector, was protecting this whole thing and supporting it enough that Luther's translation of the Bible could be published. But there might have been certain elements of sort of anti-Papal propaganda where he might have said, well, you know this is a bit too much. You know if every image of the antichrist the devil or some kind of beastly monster wears a Papal crown, so maybe we can actually tone that down a bit.
