---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Luther and Marriage
title: Luther and Marriage
stop_id: '17'
permalink: "/stops/17"
audio_file: 017.mp3
substops:
- 17A
- 17B
parent_stop: '17'
---

## Eric Bruce

Louis Nebelsick shares remarkable stories about Luther's wife and the family structure of Luther's Reformation.

## Louis Nebelsick

Katharina von Bora was a noble lady. She was a woman from an impoverished noble family. And that was a big problem, because back then if you were noble and you wanted someone to marry your girl you had to provide a dowry, and if you didn't have enough money to get a dowry, you had to put your girl into a cloister. And you didn't want your son-in-law to be some kind of peasant or something like that. That would be dishonoring your great family name. So, she was one of these girls who was put into a cloister. And she and - I think - seven others when the Reformation went on, they absconded. They ran away and ran to Wittenberg.

Back then reformers, a few of them had gotten married, but they really didn't know what to do and they Luther was still running around in his monks habit the whole time, yeah. And then suddenly all these girls turned up. So Martin Luther gets together with his buddies and says, "Okay, got these ladies," and he couldn't keep a grown unmarried lady in your house, it would be a scandal. So he decided to marry them off. He went to all his students or monks and he took the noble girl, didn't he?

One of the big revolutions of Martin Luther's Protestantism was he had been married. He and his wife would become paradigms of moral behavior. There wasn't any fooling around anymore, which used to be the case. You know, the priests were to be celibate, but it doesn't mean they weren't allowed to be naughty every once a while. But they weren't allowed to have kids and have a family because this would have destroyed the unity of the Church, yeah.

It was Martin Luther who said, "No, it's going to be the Pastor and the Pastor's wife who are going to be like the familial center of the Church." Yes, and so they were living the model family life. So that's why you didn't just have pictures of Martin Luther. You had him and his wife, and - because only as a family father was he an authority, a moral authority within the Church as well.

## Eric Bruce

At 17A, Louis has more delightful stories about Katharina and Luther's family life. In 17B, Armin Kunz tells us why these Cranach portraits of Luther and Katharina were revolutionary.
