---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: More on Katarina Vo Bora
title: More on Katarina Vo Bora
stop_id: 17A
permalink: "/stops/17A"
audio_file: 017A.mp3
substops:
- 17A
- 17B
parent_stop: '17'
---

## Louis Nebelsick

Katharina von Bora was also no shrinking violet. She was quite a forceful lady, yes. She would be more or less the boss of what was going on in that house. She was economically in control of this quite large estate, not only gotten the cloister from the prince Elector to live in, but also its estate. She was running a farm, Martin Luther was terrible … he wasn’t interested in economic stuff, this was her job.

His house is more like a boarding house for visitors and for students and they'd have a big dinner downstairs every evening, and this had been paid for. Katharina von Bora was running the farm and then bringing the donations, and she was actually the manager of the Reformation, yeah. She was very much in command of that house and this is something which was imprinted on Protestantism.

And at least Lutheranism, the pastor's wife has always been as - I wouldn't say as important she does not do the preaching, but she runs the Sunday school. She's the person looking also the charitable wing of the Church and stuff like that. So this idea of the families being the model of the authority of the Church - I think that's a totally different approach to the way the traditional Church functions.

This is also part of the magic of Luther's life that he celebrates this happy marriage. He loves family life. He loves eating. He likes drinking. He loves his beer. He says, "When I drink my beer, the Gospel flows." Yes, and so, imagine drinking his beer and translating his Gospel and things like this, that's certainly Martin Luther, he loved life. Yeah.
