---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Luther's House
title: Luther's House
stop_id: '18'
permalink: "/stops/18"
audio_file: 018.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '18'
---

## Eric Bruce

Tomoko Emmerling helps us imagine what Luther's life was like in the heady times of the Reformation.

## Dr. Tomoko Emmerling

Luther’s House in Wittenberg is of course a very important site of the Reformation and of Reformation history. Martin Luther spent more than 30 years of his life in this house. When he first came to Wittenberg, it was still an Augustinian monastery, so he lived there as a monk among monks. And after his marriage with Katharina von Bora, he lived there as a family.

The Prince-Elector even gave the house to Luther as a present. So at the end he was the owner of the house and had several renovations done. And he once complained in a letter that is house doesn't get ready and things like that. And the archeological excavations stove tiles were found, sumptuous stoves with polychrome stove tiles and depicting for example Eve or other persons from the Old Testament. And interestingly, the same stove tiles have been found in Cardinal Albrecht's residence in Halle. Cardinal Albrecht was one of the main antagonists of Martin Luther.

The paneling of the walls and the floor is from around 1540 and also the doors and the furniture is from Luther's time. It is nice to imagine that this could be the place of his table talks and his meals and the meetings with his friends and colleagues and things like that.
