---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Philipp Melanchthon
title: Philipp Melanchthon
stop_id: '19'
permalink: "/stops/19"
audio_file: 019.mp3
substops:
- 19A
parent_stop: '19'
---

## Eric Bruce

Joanna Lindell tells us about one of Luther's most important collaborators.

## Joanna Lindell

Melanchthon was one of the great, great scholars and minds of his time. He was a very close friend and colleague of Martin Luther. He was a professor and a lecturer at the University of Wittenberg as well. He was considered to be one of the most brilliant minds and thinkers of his time. He was very involved in the Reformation. There is a wonderful very iconic image of Melanchthon, it is a portrait by Albrecht Dürer. So, Dürer's engraving of 1526 which is just this gloriously beautiful depiction. This is a very good likeness of Melanchthon, but also to point out this strong emphasis in his forehead. Dürer captured bulging veins in the forehead of Melanchthon and his very clear gaze, his profile. These are all very specifically intended to convey that this man is a very brilliant thinker and scholar.

Melanchthon is almost in profile format not exactly, but almost. And that earlier portrait of Martin Luther in profile with the doctoral cap, it's very important to note that that was a new way of depicting Luther and it wasn't a new way of depicting a portrait, but it wasn't common during this time period and people would have been most familiar with portraits and profile as seen on ancient coins of great rulers. He is presented as this sort of powerful figure linked to the notion of a ruler, but he is also very clearly presented in this image as a scholar. And his ideas can and should be listened to and considered. The year that this portrait was made, Melanchthon published a Greek grammar textbook and he was invited to Nuremberg by the City Council to help establish the town's first public school. So actually in Germany he's sort of known to be the Father of Education.

## Eric Bruce

19A will share how Melanchthon and Luther worked with the Humanist Movement of the 16<sup>th</sup> Century.
