---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Humanism
title:  Philipp Melanchthon
stop_id: 19A
permalink: "/stops/19A"
audio_file: 019A.mp3
substops:
- 19A
parent_stop: '19'
---

## Joanna Lindell

Melanchthon arrived in Wittenberg in 1518 at the age of 21, and he very soon established this very close relationship, friendship, and an intellectual rapport with Luther. They really were good, dear, close friends in the sense that they supported and challenged one another. Scholars were coming from all over to hear their lectures on Biblical Humanism. Humanism is one of the backbones of the Reformation, is an intellectual movement which was going on in Europe at this time.

Friedrich was a humanist and part of humanist circles, Luther and Melanchthon where as well. The Humanists were very keen to go back to original early sources and look at those original sources themselves and encourage people to do that. It was popular to look back at very early art as well and so a lot of ideas, Humanist ideas have come from the past as a way to look forward into the future.

During the Medieval period in Europe, it was less common for people, especially just average people, to question authority and to question the Church and feudal system and so forth. But the Humanists were largely responsible for saying, “No we absolutely need to question not just authority, but we need to question ideas that we have in our head and beliefs that we hold dear, so we're going to look to the past and look at original sources to help answer some of those questions for ourselves.”
