---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: why exhibition and archeology
title: why exhibition and archeology
stop_id: 2
permalink: "/stops/2"
audio_file: 02.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '2'
hero_images:
 - path: 2.jpg
   alt_text: marbles? alalal
---

## Eric Bruce

This exhibition is a remarkable collaboration between Mia and several German museums and historic sites that explores the impact of the Reformation through historical and artistic ideas and objects. Dr. Harold Meller, organizing curator of Martin Luther: Art and the Reformation and Director of the State Office for Archaeology Saxony-Anhalt and also of Heritage Management, and Professor Louis D. Nebelsick with the State Office for Heritage Management and Archaeology Saxony-Anhalt.

## Dr. Harold Meller

The idea of this exhibition is making the 500 years anniversary of Luther's posting his theses, at the same time, the project aims its drawing attention to the sites of the Reformation's birthplace where the exhibition items come from, and provide extraordinary objects, most of which has never been seen outside of Germany before, and most probably will never be seen in this form again.

## Louis Nebelsick

And for the first time, you've actually been able to get a hold of physical remains of Martin Luther's life. We've done excavations in his boyhood home in Mansfeld, we've done excavations in his house, he and Katharina von Bora's house in Wittenberg, and we have the glasses they drank from, the remains of the meals that they had. We have the garbage; to put it that way, but it certainly lets us see things that were never seen before that Martin Luther does not come from a poor miner's background. His dad was the richest guy in town.

At this huge house, they were eating and drinking like, for instance, Martin Luther, when he has his own place it is the second-largest house in Wittenberg, the largest is of course the Prince-Elector. He is living like a prince, yes, and this shows that I think something quite clear about Martin Luther. He was an important man in his time. And this is something really, really important and the exhibition is not a sectarian show, we are not celebrating Lutheranism. We're talking about a man who changed history. It's a global event, this nailing of the theses on the door changed history irrevocably.

This is something that has a cultural impact, which is being felt up to this day. This is also part of this whole discovery of the importance of your own conscience, the importance of your own decisions, the importance of ethics, and the importance of consulting the Bible yourself, these are effects that go on up until the present day, and I think that's why it's so important.
