---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Pamphlet
title: Pamphlet
stop_id: '20'
permalink: "/stops/20"
audio_file: 020.mp3
substops:
- 20A
- 20B
- 20C
parent_stop: '20'
hero_images:
  - path: TDI00014.jpg
    alt_text: |
      Philip Melanchthon and Johannes Schwertfeger
      Workshop of Lucas Cranach the Elder (illustrations)
      Passional Christi und Antichristi (Passional of Christ and the Antichrist)
      Wittenberg: Johann Rhau-Grunenberg, 1521
---

## Eric Bruce

The vitriolic fight between the Catholic Papacy and Luther's Reformers fueled by the printing press left us with some spicy images. Joanna Lindell explains.

## Joanna Lindell

Philipp Melanchthon and Johann Schwerdfeger are credited with creating the text for this pamphlet. I think arguably it's the most influential, important pamphlet of the Reformation. We were very fortunate to be able to acquire this pamphlet in the Thrivent collection a couple of years ago. And even though it was a very popular pamphlet and read by many people and reprinted many times, it's fairly rare today and in particular to be intact. And part of that is because of its sort of lengthy format. It's twenty six pages long, and it has thirteen illustrated examples comparing Christ living a very godly life with a very ungodly life of the papacy in contrast on the other side.

So, it was an extremely polemical, very, very strong statement. This was created by Lucas Cranach, and it's pretty clear because there're some differences, stylistic differences in the images that it was a workshop project, so different people would've worked on it in Cranach's workshop. This was intended to do - was expose the failings and abuses of the papacy, not just the current papacy at that time, which even today the Church, the Catholic Church also absolutely recognizes there were major issues of corruption in the Papacy and in the Church at that time, but also sort of as a whole historically. And this is also an example of a more popular kind of imagery. And notice too how large the images are. The text is actually quite small. The printing press which was invented in the mid 15<sup>th</sup> Century, so it hadn’t been around that long, but had been around a while, and most of the early books which were printed were mostly text.

Well, so when you start to see that the image is larger than the text, that's a very strong message too at showing how very powerful those images are. And there were still many people at this time who couldn’t read. You could look through this pamphlet and you could get the sense of the message that is in the text without reading a thing.

## Eric Bruce

In stop 20A Christiane Andersson, Professor of Art History at Bucknell University guides us through the satirical image of an indulgence monster used to criticize the Catholic Church. 20B shows some of the Catholic satirical images used to criticize Luther. 20C is a wonderful description of the colorful print satirizing Catholic monks.
