---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: A Broadsheet Decrying the Sale of Indulgences
title: A Broadsheet Decrying the Sale of Indulgences
stop_id: 20A
permalink: "/stops/20A"
audio_file: 020A.mp3
substops:
- 20A
- 20B
- 20C
parent_stop: '20'
---

## Christiane Andersson

This is a broadsheet that has no text at all. It conveys its polemical anti-Catholic message through the image alone. In anti-Catholic propaganda monsters were used to show how the polemical opponent is contrary to God's creation and therefore is a devil or a demon. We see such a demon partly bird-like with wings, with the feet of a bird and female breasts. In the right hand, a collection box with which the monster collects money from the sale of indulgences is shown.

One foot stands in a receptacle with an aspergil that Catholic priests used for spraying holy water during Mass, that little object that sticks up out of that container. And the use of such objects was one of the very many Catholic practices that Luther opposed as having no basis in the Bible.

This she-demon wears a veil like a Catholic nun over her head. In the open snout of this monster, five clerics around the table are stuffing themselves. This is probably a reference to the sin of gluttony, which these clerics are committing. Gluttony was sin that Lutherans felt the Catholic priests were constantly committing. People were starving, but their priest was always well-fed. We see on the upper side there a number of little monsters that are arriving presumably to come and eat those sausages that are being prepared. Above the monster's head, we see a fire burning. Some scholars have suggested that it's a reference to purgatory.

This broadsheet criticizes, as did Luther, the Catholic practice of selling indulgences. Indulgences were purchased sometimes for a lot of money if you were granted many years of indulgence; in other words, not frying in purgatory. These indulgence sheets usually had at least one or two of these little seals hanging down from them as one sees in this broadsheet, and those are the seals of different bishops and archbishops that made it legitimate. This monster rests his backside on an indulgence.
