---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: The 7 heads of Martin Luther
title: The 7 heads of Martin Luther
stop_id: 20B
permalink: "/stops/20B"
audio_file: 020B.mp3
substops:
- 20A
- 20B
- 20C
parent_stop: '20'
---

## Christiane Andersson

We shouldn't forget that the Catholics created polemical images, and they had a lot to say about what a monster Martin Luther was. One of the most successful of the Catholic examples was the seven-headed Martin Luther. The Catholics adopted the imagery of monsters that had been so prevalent in Lutheran polemics.

In 1529, the Catholic publicist Johann Cochlaeus published his anti-Lutheran tract, the "Seven-headed Martin Luther.” Cochlaeus' strategy was to fight Luther with his own words using quotations from Luther's writings essentially taken out of context. That amounted to a handbook of attacks against Luther.

Luther is presented as a multi-cephalic charlatan in obvious analogy to the seven-headed dragon that is described in Chapter 13 of the Apocalypse which signified the devil. The seven-headed portrait was certainly intended as a rebuttal to Luther's identification of the Pope as the antichrist.

The seven heads essentially encapsulates different characteristics of Martin Luther. So the first one reading from left to right shows him to be a doctor of theology. We see a head that wears the typical headdress of a scholar of this period. The second one showing his first name Martin shows a little head of what this artist imagined say Martin to look like.

The third one refers to his last name Luther, but it shows him wearing a turban that says he is of the Muslim faith and therefore a heretic. The one in the center shows him in his ecclesiastical garb and he's wearing the stole that priests wear when they are saying Mass.

The next one is my favorite. There he is shown with bees in his bonnet quite literally and those of course are intended to show how completely misguided and crazy Luther is. The next one, he is here shown in his guise as a visitator, the visitor representatives of the Lutheran Church who traveled around Germany to the different parishes and checked on how things were going, whether people in those parishes were adhering to strictly Lutheran theology.

The last head all the way on the right which is labeled Barrabas is perhaps the most accusatory of all of them. Barrabas was the thief who was let go by Pontius Pilate, and Christ was imprisoned by Pontius Pilate. That pamphlet runs sixty pages.

In terms of numbers however, the Catholic camp in this religious struggle created far fewer examples. They seemed to have had fewer artists who were willing and able to create the kind of polemical images that the Lutheran camp had on their side.
