---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: The Devil's Bagpipe
title: Pamphlet
stop_id: 20C
permalink: "/stops/20C"
audio_file: 020C.mp3
substops:
- 20A
- 20B
- 20C
parent_stop: '20'
---

## Christiane Andersson

This is called the "Devil's Bagpipe." It's a work that was created about 1535. We are looking here at an image that shows the devil using the head of a monk as his demonic instrument in every sense of the word.

Bagpipes were often played at church festivals and these had kind of a questionable reputation in this period. The church in particular disapproved of dancing. People danced to bagpipe music. To be specific, dancing was opposed to by the Catholic Church because ladies wore very long dresses, but no underwear. So when they were twirled around there were of course issues of modesty.

In this broadsheet by Erhard Schön, we recognize the monk by his tonsure – that shaved area on the top of the head, and he has what is not just a double chin, he has a goiter. A goiter is a satirical detail that we often see in early German art of this period that makes someone look foolish or monstrous. People in that period got goiters because they lacked iodine in their diet. We see the devil blowing into the monk's ear. This was a customary way to show that the devil holds sway over a person and it's not rare at all again in art of this period.

The extended nose is what the devil is actually playing on. We see here then in anti-Catholic and certainly also anti-monastic broadsheet that shows how Catholic monks are not Christ's servants on Earth, but rather the instruments of devil. Luther was opposed to all of the monastic orders and certainly opposed to the Catholic priesthood.

In the lower right corner we see eight lines of text. Here it is the devil who is talking. He says he used to be able to have control over people, like the control he has over this monk. But he says that now the devil's control has ended, meaning this is the beginning of a new era with the Lutheran Reformation. Nonetheless, the devil says, he hopes the people’s former sinfulness will soon reemerge and that she will again regain the upper hand.
