---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Luther and the Jewish and Muslim Faiths
title: Luther and the Jewish and Muslim Faiths
stop_id: '21'
permalink: "/stops/21"
audio_file: 021.mp3
substops:
- 21A
- 21B
parent_stop: '21'
---

## Eric Bruce

This exhibition offers some perspectives of a darker chapter of the Reformation. Tom Rassieur shares his insights on Luther's writings about non-Christian religions.

## Tom Rassieur

As this room makes clear, the Reformation gave rise to many different kinds of conflicts, and those that were religious were not simply between Protestants and Catholics, but were between different versions of Protestantism itself.

Luther's views toward non-Christian religions strike us today as being extremely problematic. In the display cases before you there's an array of books that Luther published regarding Judaism. In the beginning his views are scholarly and he is trying to learn more about Jewish history and Jewish theology. Over time his views become more negative culminating in a book called "The Jews and Their Lies." May Lutherans and most in America have come to disavow Luther's later views on the Jews. Nonetheless, these ideas remain disturbing.

With regard to Islam, Luther was aware of his own ignorance and spent many years trying to obtain more information, specifically to get his hands on a Quran. In one of the cases nearby is a Latin translation of the Quran. Luther played a role in its publication and provided a preface in which he condemned the religion.

In our world in which religious tension still exists, it's important to face these texts straight on, and to think about their impact on our lives today. To help those of us organizing this exhibition better understand the implication of these ideas we formed an Interfaith Advisory Council and we've invited two members of that council, Norman Cohen, Rabbi Emeritus of Bet Shalom and Hanadi Chehabeddine of the Islamic Resource Group to share with us some of the implications of these texts.

## Eric Bruce

In 21A, Rabbi Norman M. Cohen, Rabbi Emeritus with Bet Shalom Synagogue offers us his insights on Martin Luther's writings about Jews and the repercussions 400 years later. In 21B, Hanadi Chehabeddine, Speaker with the Islamic Resource Group shares her thoughts about Luther's writings on Islam.
