---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Hanadi Shehabeddine
title: Luther on Judiasm and Islam
stop_id: 21B
permalink: "/stops/21B"
audio_file: 021B.mp3
substops:
- 21A
- 21B
parent_stop: '21'
---

## Hanadi Shehabeddine

For me as a Muslim, when I read Martin Luther's views of Islam, I find that he has great admiration to the traditions, celebrations, and humble way of life of Muslims, and he wrote about that with passion.

I think what he admired most was the centralization of the idea of God in the lives of Muslims.  A person waking up in the morning has God at the center of his attention.  Because of the five daily prayers, the intention one has in every single movement for continuous repentance, the purification of the heart, that are very central to the Islamic teachings and how these beliefs translate into Muslims’ daily actions.

In fact a lot of the changes he introduced to Christianity already existed in Islam.  Like canceling monastery order, prohibition of use of images, views on allowing divorce and the concept of God's grace.  So it is as if Islam was exactly what he wanted to say about Christianity.

On the other hand he criticized Islam for not accepting Jesus, peace be upon him, as God.  In Islam, Jesus is described a prophet that came to deliver one message, which is, worship God alone.  Denouncing the idea of Jesus being God was enough for Martin Luther to make Muslims the devil.

Muslims, or what he referred to as the Turks, became now “the other.”  He described the religion as evil and Muslims as the children of all lies and murder.  I'm not sure how much of these thoughts still reside in people's minds.  I can definitely see similarities between the thoughts promoted 500 years ago and some today.

We may not know the correlation between the two, but in all cases, I personally think it is important at this point of the Evangelical Lutheran Churches in America or the ELCA to issue an official declaration to the Muslim community clearly rebuking Martin Luther's views of Islam and distancing themselves from his incorrect perception.

This declaration will be a conclusive evidence to terminate any connection to the writings of Martin Luther on Islam today.  It is important for people to not take part willingly or unwillingly in some of the injustices that are being caused to Muslims today.

If I were to put it in a sentence, Martin Luther failed to see Muslims and Jews as neighbors, which I think is at the heart of Christianity.  The Lutheran churches are doing a great job beginning the healing process by issuing documents of understanding and positive initiatives like for example the August Resolution and My Muslim Neighbor, but an official declaration to the Muslim community is still an important step in completing this effort.

It took a genocide for the ELCA to realize the damage that Martin Luther's writings contributed to Jews in a specific time in history.  We do not need another genocide of Muslims to realize the problem and the writings that were promoted by Martin Luther; we really don't.
