---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Debate Lecturn
title: Debate Lecturn
stop_id: '22'
permalink: "/stops/22"
audio_file: 022.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '22'
---

## Eric Bruce

Again, here is Tom Rassieur to tell us about this stunning debate lectern.

## Tom Rassieur

This is the debate lectern of the University of Wittenberg.  This wasn't made in Luther's time; this was made 140 years later.  It is in a sense a memorial to Martin Luther.  When Luther originally posted the 95 Theses in 1517, his intention was not to spark a revolution or a giant reformation, tt was really to hold an academic debate such as the kind of debate that would be held on this very stand.


Jacob Johann Marchand
Debate Lectern, after 1685
Wood, carved, painted and leaf-gilded








This is a perfect memorial to Luther in that it's a place for argumentation and the search for the truth.  The person who is presiding over a debate would stand in the upper register of the stand and read out the question at hand.  The people who were answering the questions were on the lower level.  So this was a place where the Word was very much present, since Luther's theology was centered around the Word, the Word alone, the Word of God.

We see a familiar face here in addition to Luther's.  If you look at the upper register on the left you'll see a small portrait of Frederick the Wise, the founder of the University.  It actually looks a lot like the University seal which was very important to the University as the imprint of truth.  It was the seal that marked documents that made them official.

I find the declaration on this debate stand pretty interesting because as we've seen, the Reformation brought about a certain austerity in art a change from what the Catholics had used before.  And here we have a Baroque wedding cake with lots of white icing and gold decoration - lots of ornamentation that is joyous.

So as we rise up to the top of the debate stand, there is a column that ascends where we see the likeness of Luther and above him Christ on the cross and a faithful person beneath and a scroll above that says, Fide Sola (Faith Alone.)  Above that the name of God inscribed in Hebrew letters.

## Louis Neblesick

When the Luther family finally gets so impoverished that they have to sell their house, and this happens, family can't hold this expensive property anymore, the kids are desolate, they certainly don't have either Katharina's or Luther's genius.  And then the University buys this and they turn part of the building to a lecture hall.

If we look at this lectern we can see there's an image of Martin Luther in the center of it, yes, and this shows us how important Martin Luther is of course for the whole concept of education.  His idea of Sola Scriptura is the modern way we approach looking for the truth.  The beginnings of the modern science lens as well.  You don't listen to Aristotle, his natural history, you go look at the animals, you start looking at the rocks and things like that, yeah.  And so it’s quite a revolution also in the whole way that we approach our search for the truth.

Martin Luther is embedded in scholarly culture.  In fact he has turned us all into scholars.  He’s put that butcher boy up to the level of the professor by saying both can look for the truth in the scriptures, yes.  And he also opens up institutions of learning for broader sections of society, this is important; and that's why we have Martin Luther being celebrated in this great filigree Baroque celebration of learning as we have Martin Luther right in the center of it.

## Kaywin Feldman

Thank you for visiting Mia and “Martin Luther: Art and the Reformation.”  We hope you enjoyed the exhibition and look forward to seeing you again soon.  This exhibition was organized by the Minneapolis Institute of Art in cooperation with the following partners: Luther Memorials Foundation of Saxony-Anhalt Wittenberg; Deutsches Historisches Museum, Berlin; Foundation Schloss Friedenstein Gotha; all under the Leadership of the State Museum of Prehistory, Halle.
 
Its realization has been made possible due to the support of the Foreign Office of the Federal Republic of Germany within the framework of the Luther Decade.  We'd like to thank our generous supporters who helped bring this important show to Minneapolis.  The exhibition is presented by Thrivent Financial.  The lead sponsors are John and Nancy Lindahl, The Hognander Foundation, K.A.H.R. Foundation, Bradbury and Janet Anderson Family Foundation, Jim and Carmen Campbell, and Thomson Reuters.  Our major sponsors are Delta Air Lines and the National Endowment for the Arts.  Thanks to our media sponsor, the Star Tribune, and our community partners, Mount Olivet Lutheran Church of South Minneapolis, Augsburg College, Concordia University, and John and Shirley Nilsen.

## Eric Bruce

Audio tour produced and directed by Barbara Wiener; sound design by Jason Allmendinger, and I am Eric Bruce.  Thanks and visit us again soon.
