---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Childhood
title: Childhood
stop_id: '3'
permalink: "/stops/3"
audio_file: 03.mp3
substops:
- 3A
parent_stop: '3'
---

## Eric Bruce

Dr. Tomoko Elisabeth Emmerling is Project Manager with the State Office for Heritage Management and Archaeology at the Saxony-Anhalt State Museum of Prehistory. She shares her excitement about recent archaeological discoveries, which reveal a new view of Martin Luther's childhood and upbringing.

## Dr. Tomoko Emmerling

The interesting thing is that until some years ago, very little was known about Luther's boyhood, which is surprising, regarding the fact that he is such an historically important and such a well-known man. Luther himself said that his boyhood was very poor, that his parents were poor, that his father was a poor miner, and had to work in the copper mines. But interestingly, some years ago, in the courtyard of his parent’ home, a pit was found filled with garbage from his parents’ household. And we saw hundreds of finds, dating in time around 1500. So, exactly the time when Luther's family lived there, he was born 1483.

The finds were really surprising. And the one hand there was the well-known household material, which you will find in mediaeval cities, fragments of plates, cooking pots and things like that. And on the other hand, there were really surprising finds like ornaments from festive clothes, women's clothes, like leaf pendants from the sleeves or little roses that were sewn onto the clothes, ornaments from women's dress that wasn't a poor woman's dress. You don't throw away your festive gown.

There were silver coins. It seemed like the content of a purse. So the question was, what happened here, on the one hand, and the other question is, does this fit to Luther's own image of himself growing up in a poor parent home? Before that, one thought there was one little building and this was his parents' home, and at the end of the research, we know now that the house of his parents was a huge house, it was built around the court in four sides in a splendid location within the city at the city gate.

We now know that his father didn't start as a poor miner in Mansfeld. He came there with enough money to build up a business from – right from the beginning. That he was one of the wealthier people in town that he was one of the politically important people in town, because he was one of the so-called _Fiermeister_ that is a Mayor of a city quarter. So we now have a corrected picture of Martin Luther's boyhood.

## Eric Bruce

Imagine Martin Luther before he was a monk or a reformer. Imagine him as a child playing with toys. In stop 3A, Dr. Emmerling takes us there.
