---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Games and Toys
title: Childhood
stop_id: 3A
permalink: "/stops/3A"
audio_file: 03A.mp3
substops:
- 3A
parent_stop: '3'
hero_images:
  - path: C 059.jpg
    alt_text: |
      Marbles
      Mansfeld, Luther’s parents’ home, About 1500
      Fired clay
  - path: C 061.jpg
    alt_text: |
      Bone Bowling Pin
      Mansfeld, Luther’s parents’ home,
      About 1500
  - path: image13.png
    alt_text: |
      Bird-shaped Whistle
      Mansfeld, Luther’s parents’ home, About 1500
      White, fired clay
  - path: image26.png
    alt_text: |
      Belt Mount with Letter Appliqué
      Mansfeld, Luther’s parents’ home,
      Around 1500
      Brass on leather
---

## Dr. Tomoko Emmerling

I think for the first time we've got a picture of him who can tell something about his childhood. We've got the cooking pots, his mother or her maids cooked with. In this pit was also children's toys.

There were marbles, and they look like they were shaped at home out of -- made out of clay and baked in the oven. So even imagine that maybe it was young Luther himself who shaped the marbles and baked them and played with them. There are other toys like a bovine metal bone, which was used as a bowling pin. We've got a depiction of children playing bowling on Breugel paintings for example.

We've got a little bird made of clay, which was used as a whistle; partly filled with water and blown into. Maybe it was Luther, who used them. We've got the bones of animals, we know, for example, that they ate predominantly young pork, which has a fine meat, and also ducks, geese and chicken.

There were also, for example, leftovers from figs, which must have been important, so it's not that usual to have fixed in the house. We've got a very beautiful object, is a letter "D," which was an applicated to the end of a belt. Interestingly, Luther had a sister named Dorothea, so maybe it was hers.

I think for the first time, we've got a picture of him we can tell something about his childhood. You get nearer to him by seeing these elements until you understand the context, for example, of the Reformation, to understand how historically important person like Luther, how he lived, what his everyday life looked like.
