---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Politics in Luther's Time
title: Politics in Luther's Time
stop_id: '4'
permalink: "/stops/4"
audio_file: 04.mp3
substops:
- 4A
parent_stop: '4'
---

## Eric Bruce

The story of the Reformation is filled with intrigue and characters.  It was a time of intricate relationships between the Catholic Church, the Holy Roman Emperor, and the Saxon Royalty.  Tom Rassieur is the John E. Andrus III curator of prints and drawings at the Minneapolis Institute of Art and site curator of the exhibition.  He will explain the complex politics in Martin Luther's time and describe who these people are.

## Tom Rassieur

This painting is a portrait of Frederick the Wise, painted by Lucas Cranach the Elder.  He was the Duke of Saxony, a very powerful figure.  He was also one of the seven electors of the Holy Roman Empire, meaning he was one of the seven figures who could cast ballots to select the Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.  He was an incredibly powerful man.  He founded the University of Wittenberg where Luther taught and this was the place where the opening rounds of the action of the Reformation took place.
 
After Luther posted the 95 Theses and controversies began to arise, Frederick became Luther's protector.  It is very important in allowing Luther, the political protection that he needed in order to express his ideas.  It's not entirely clear if the main motivation that Frederick had for protecting Luther was theological, it could have been that it was also political and economic. Because, of course, as monasteries are suppressed, their lands become available.  In fact, one indication of Frederick's ability to take control of these lands is that he took the Augustinian Monastery where Luther lived and gave it and its attendant lands to Luther as his home and as a means of income to support Luther and his family.  There are multiple portraits of Frederick the Wise.  The one you are seeing here happens to be quite a good one, painted by Lucas Cranach the Elder.

Lucas Cranach has come to be thought of as the image maker of the Reformation, but before that, he was a court artist and businessman whose products were images. It was a little bit like a fashion house and that you could go and order a very high-quality painting.  But they also had off the rack products.  The Cranach workshop produced prints, which could be distributed in great numbers that illustrated books; they were the go to guys when you needed images.  Frederick himself probably did not order this portrait, it was probably ordered by his brother known as John the Steadfast, who is his successor, in order to show the populous that he was loyal to Frederick and that he was the legitimate successor.  Next to the portrait of Frederick is a portrait of John the Steadfast.  During his reign as elector of Saxony, which began in 1525 with Frederick's death and continued till his own death 6 or 7 years later, John was its ardent supporter of Luther.  But the portrait we see of John was actually not ordered by John himself, it was ordered by his son, Johann Friedrich the Magnanimous.
 
Johann Friedrich ordered 60 pairs of paintings of Frederick and John in order to establish the legitimacy of his own rein.  He took the paintings and the 60 pairs, had a printed text that was glued to the bottom of the image and these texts were of course extolling the virtues of John and Frederick.  The 60 pairs were then distributed to friends and political allies.  Nearby the painted portrait of John the Steadfast is another portrait of him, but this one is a woodcut to which coloring has been applied.  It's easily recognizable by the stripes on Johann's head.  Woodcuts like these were cheap substitutes for paintings and were much more numerous at the time.  Today, they are much more rare, because people disregarded them.  They were posted up on walls or just tossed away and so very, very few woodcuts of this type survive to the present.
 
## Eric Bruce

Lucas Cranach the Elder was one of the main artists of the Reformation.  You will see lots of his work here in this gallery.  Beautiful, but may be most lasting is how he shaped Martin Luther's campaign.  Press 4A to hear Armin Kunz, a specialist in 19th and 20th century European prints and drawings share Cranach's story.
