---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Lucas Crannach
title: Lucas Crannach
stop_id: 4A
permalink: "/stops/4A"
audio_file: 04A.mp3
substops:
- 4A
parent_stop: '4'
hero_images:
  - path: K1000082.jpg
    alt_text: |
      Lucas Cranach the Elder
      German, 1472-1553
      Frederick the Wise
      1525–1527
      Oil on ash
---

## Armin Kunz

Cranach was an artist who was employed by the Court of Wittenberg by Elector Frederick the Wise. While Cranach was working in his early career in Vienna for about four years from 1500 to 1504, he made a name for himself, he was active as a book illustrator, as a printmaker and of course also as a painter. The connections that he forged at University of Vienna with the Humanists, some of the leading Humanists of their time probably made Frederick the Wise, who was looking for a new court artist, so he called out for Cranach. Cranach accepted the job and arrived by the end of 1504 in Wittenberg, which at that time was the seat of the Elector of Saxony, very, very small town on the river Elbe. Frederick the Wise, as an Elector, one of the seven electors that have voting rights to elect the Holy Roman Emperor of the German nation was one of the most powerful political figures at the time. So Cranach arrived in late 1504 at the Court of Wittenberg and from that moment on, became an employee, a court artist for Frederick the Wise.

He was a very faithful loyal artist who then stayed with the electors of Saxony until his death in 1553. 1520, Cranach was 48, successful artist, businessman, entrepreneur, someone who also had a pharmacy, who had a liquor license, and by then, more than one house on the most prominent square of Wittenberg where he had his workshop, where he had his business shop. Luther at that time, the Augustinian monk was 37, and they became very close in that year of 1520. Luther became the Godfather to Cranach's last born child.

At the same time in 1520, it was Cranach who engraved actually used the medium of engraving, which was kind of unusual for him to create a portrait of Luther and that and a few other portraits that he created dominate our view of Luther to this very day. We have an image of Luther that will be a painting of Cranach, a version of a painting of a Cranach, a copy of the Cranach, a print by Cranach, so he was basically the one who shaped the image, the image campaign. So we have a highly prolific artist who provides a new religious movement with its imagery at the same time, we have an artist who is very sensitive and knowledgeable about how to use images actually in all kind of different forms and media and function. And I think this is what makes it even more interesting than just the fact that we have an artist who illustrates religious ideas.
