---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Catholic Art
title: Catholic Art
stop_id: '6'
permalink: "/stops/6"
audio_file: 06.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '6'
---

## Eric Bruce

Remember, Martin Luther was a Catholic monk. He grew up surrounded by art like the glorious religious subjects in his gallery. Dr. Johan van Parys, the Director of Liturgy and the Sacred Arts for the Basilica of St. Mary in Minneapolis will guide you through ideas of Catholic religious devotion and the remarkable objects here from the 15th and 16th century Catholic church.

## Johan van Parys

From the very beginning of its existence, the Catholic Church has really embraced the arts for a whole number of reasons, one of which was to spread the gospel message, tell the story and tell the story through images. Another reason is because art, architecture, music are able to create some sort of a realm of order, whereas most of us in our daily life experience chaos. And so, music and art provide a space where you can come and experience calm and peace.

When we think of the Middle Ages for instance, for many people, the only contact they had with beauty was in their churches. Churches were open and they were intended to be beautiful, not only to glorify God, but also to bring people closer to God through beauty. The commitment of the church was really to get people into heaven. And by creating beautiful spaces, it was almost like opening a window into heaven.

If on Earth we can see all this beauty, then how much more beautiful will it be once we are in heaven. And wouldn't you want to be there. The churches, the art, the music were a window into heaven. On a very fundamental level, we believe that beauty creates beauty, ugliness engenders more ugliness. And so to be lovers of beauty, to be providers of beauty was intended to create more beauty and so when one goes into a church, one of the effects that the magnitude of the building and the colors and the stained-glass windows, one of the goals of this is that a person going in there, steps almost into a different realm from the business outside into a church or a mosque or a temple, you go through these doors and you go into a different world. It's a world of quiet and peace and calm, and that's where we hope that the encounter with the Divine will happen.
