---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Vestments
title: Vestments
stop_id: '7'
permalink: "/stops/7"
audio_file: 07.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '7'
---

## Eric Bruce

Again, Johan van Parys.

## Johan van Parys

These vestments are important for a number of reasons. One, they are intended to be beautiful, but they also were intending to take a human being, a priest, and transition him into a liturgical function. So by putting on these vestments, you are almost changing the person or at least changing the role of the person very, very visually. That was the first step. For different liturgical functions, there were different vestments. Priests would wear a chasuble that we see right here for mass, celebration of the mass. So, by virtue of what the person was wearing, you would know, oh, this person is a deacon, and this person is a priest and they're going to celebrate mass, they're going to celebrate vespers. So the vestments communicated quite a lot about what was going to go on and who was doing what. And of course they are provided as beautiful canvas for art; not only just the beautiful textile, but also the panels that were embroidered on these vestments. For instance, in this case, you have the Blessed Virgin Mary, who is being crowned as Queen of Heaven by the Trinity surrounded by saints.

Below it, you have the annunciation, which started to hold adventure of God with Mary, which culminated into crowning of Mary as Queen of Heaven and then two most important saints, two apostles, Peter and Paul at the bottom of this vestment. We also have to imagine that the priests were standing with their back to the people, so the people would have seen this decorative element and they would have seen the coronation of Mary as Queen of Heaven, the annunciation and the story could happen right there.  

Liturgical vestments differ in color depending on the liturgical season. For instance, the season of Lent, which is a season of penance, you have purple. A season of Easter and Christmas which is celebratory is white or gold, and Feasts of Martyrs is red. This is obviously a Marian vestment. It speaks about the role of Mary and the salvation history, and so the base color of this vestment is chosen as blue, which has always been a traditional color for Mary.  

At that time that this vestment was worn in 15th, 16th century, there were very clearly prescribed prayers that were said when each one of these vestments was put on, starting with the alb, which is the white garment that is the undergarment that all priests wear and for each piece, there was a specific prayer. It is sort of like going through a transition from the non-sacred to the sacred realm and every prayer would get you one step closer to that particular realm.

Today, it is no longer so, but what priests do today is when they put on their stole, which goes under this chasuble, they would kiss the stole and the stole as a symbol of the yoke of Christ, and so thus they would commit themselves to bearing the yoke of Christ.
