---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Arm reliquary of the Apostle James the Elder
title: Arm reliquary of the Apostle James the Elder
stop_id: '8'
permalink: "/stops/8"
audio_file: 08.mp3
substops:
- 8A
- 8B
parent_stop: '8'
---

## Eric Bruce

Look at this spectacular golden arm. It was created to hold something. Johan van Parys knows what and why.

## Johan van Parys

In the Catholic church, the devotion to the saints is a long, long, long standing tradition. From the very early centuries on, we have to imagine that early Christianity was centered around the Mediterranean, so it was very small region. And the connection with the saints was easy because you lived practically near where the saint was buried. So you could go and visit the saint, but as Christianity spread out, there were not all that many saints. So pieces of the saint or pieces of cloth that touched the body of the saint were taken to other locations, so as to, I can no longer go to the saint, but I can take the saint with me.

During the Middle Ages, it became very, very big. The relics are not venerated, it is the saint represented by the relics who is venerated of course. In order to encourage that veneration, we enshrined these relics and these beautiful reliquaries, the reliquary of an arm for instance that is in the exhibit. Humans like to put their hands on things. We like to have photos of wonderful trips we have taken or when a loved one dies, we like to have at least some mementos, some physical memories of who the person was and when we hold onto it, it is as if we reconnect with this person. And so similarly with the saints, to have a physical connection with the saint became very important because relics give the Christians a direct connection with the saint.

Sometimes, people would give them special powers and sometimes relics were carried in procession to ward off evil or when there was a plague, it was in town. And of course, what they really did was prayed that this evil might stop or that this plague might stop, that was the essence of what they were doing, but they had these very physical possessions with their saints. On the one hand, by enshrining these relics into these beautiful reliquaries was honoring the saint. But also it was an invitation to devotion to the saint. When people saw this beautiful reliquary, they said, oh, you would be interested in it through this whole beauty aspect of the reliquary.

Reliquaries were very common, there were not always as beautiful as this, I mean sometimes they were very small little containers, but of course, the greater the church, the more powerful the Bishop, the wealthier the community, the richer the reliquaries would be. We have many, many, many saints and some of the saints, we have discovered actually never existed, some of these relics may or may not be true relics, but more importantly than the relic itself, or even the reliquary that contains the relic is the faith that people have and their willingness to live according to what these saints have exemplified.  

## Eric Bruce

Press 8A to explore the role of saints in people's lives during the Middle Ages. These magnificent archangels are explained in 8B.
