---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Relationship to Saints
title: Relationship to Saints
stop_id: 8A
permalink: "/stops/8A"
audio_file: 08A.mp3
substops:
- 8A
- 8B
parent_stop: '8'
---

## Johan Van Parys

What all these pieces illustrate is the devotional life which was so rich in the 15th to 16th Century. Today, when people go to Mass, they go to Mass, but in the pre-Reformation time, people would go to mass and do their own devotional things. They would visit the altars of the saints, light candles, and at the time of the consecration, when the host was elevated, bells would be rung so that people could stop whatever they were doing to have a visual communion. People would no longer share in communion that was all in the sanctuary and as the theology of the Eucharist became much more heightened, and the priest was removed more from the people, the distance between Jesus and the people became bigger and bigger. The people's participation became smaller and smaller and smaller as the access of people to worship became very, very difficult.

And so, they went to their saints. The saints were almost the ones who walked with you. The Angels, Guardian Angel walked with you and they had a very personal relationship with their saints, calling them for help, for this or for that; bringing them flowers, lighting candles. So it is almost, though they were saints, but almost a humanlike connection. In a certain sense, the devotion to the saints had taken a more important role than the actual devotion to God, which is I think one of the things that the different reform movements reacted to.
