---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Archangels
title: Reliquary
stop_id: 8B
permalink: "/stops/8B"
audio_file: 08B.mp3
substops:
- 8A
- 8B
parent_stop: '8'
hero_images:
  - path: image15.png
    alt_text: |
      Leipzig workshop
      Altarpiece Wings with the Four Archangels, 1516
      Tempera and gold on wood
---

## Johan van Parys

In addition to the saints, the Catholic Church has a great veneration for the angels as well. And there is of course – there is many categories of angels. The best known angels undoubtedly are the Archangels.

And so, this particular painting depicts four of the Archangels. The Archangels are really the protectors of the Church. When you go into Catholic Churches, you might often find Archangels guarding the doors, and they guard the doors in order to keep evil out and allow only good to come in and go out.

The word "Angel" is actually from the Greek _Ángelos_ means "Messenger." So Angels are God's messengers to the human race. The Archangels like all the Angels are attributed certain powers or they play certain roles in salvation history. The Archangel Michael on the left upper corner who is holding the scale is the one at the end of time, who will weigh whether we will make it into heaven or not. Good versus evil is the Archangel Uriel and he is shown here with a censer on top. Right top is indeed the Archangel Gabriel and the scroll he is holding is the annunciation scroll, and then Raphael is in the lower right.

So, Raphael is depicted in this painting holding a fish, which is a traditional attribute, it's based on his appearance in the Book of Tobit, where he heals Tobit using the gall of a fish. They have the wings of course, but they are often depicted in high liturgical regalia, often papal regalia that they are wearing.
