---
layout: episode
type: stop
section_title: Timeline
title: Timeline
stop_id: '9'
permalink: "/stops/9"
audio_file: 09.mp3
substops: []
parent_stop: '9'
---

## Eric Bruce

In the beginning of the 16th century, the world was primed for astonishing change. The years between 1502 and 1525 were a busy time. Tom Rassieur, exhibition site curator offers a whirlwind timeline of Martin Luther and the reformation.

## Tom Rassieur

Here in this room, which we entitled “Luther as Monk, Scholar, and Preacher,” there are a lot of things going on, this is a complicated room, and so, I want to lay out a few notable dates – a few notable events that will help you have a framework.

In 1502, Fredrick the Wise founded Wittenberg University. In 1508, Luther who is already a college graduate and an advanced student was called to Wittenberg to serve as an instructor and to continue his studies.

It was probably at about that time that he would have met Lucas Cranach, who became the image maker for the Reformation. In 1511, he took a trip to Rome himself. He actually walked there. And saw the sights of the holy city, he prayed at various churches and holy sites, but frankly he didn't feel the buzz, and he returned home full of doubts.

While Luther was busy studying and teaching in Wittenberg, there were bigger things going on in Rome. In 1514, Cardinal Albrecht of Brandenburg cut a deal with Pope Leo the X. Albrecht was to pay Leo more than 40,000 gilders. This was an immense amount of money; millions and millions, it's hard to translate into today's money, but it was a fortune.

In return, Leo gave Albrecht the concession to sell indulgences in Germany. The money from indulgences would be split; half the money would go to Albrecht, and half the money would go to Leo. Now you could avoid purgatory and go straight to Heaven, if only you bought the indulgence.

By 1517, Martin Luther was already a published author. It was late that year, actually on Halloween; October 31st, the Luther posted the 95 Theses.

They were published and republished immediately. There were many editions that came out already in 1517 during those last two months of the year. Luther spent the next couple of years defending and arguing about the theses, because they raised eyebrows definitely in the Catholic Church. In 1520, the Pope finally decided that he had enough of Luther and excommunicated him.

He issued the Papal Bull of Excommunication in 1520, and that too became a best seller. Luther responded quickly to the Bull of Excommunication issuing his own diatribe called the Execrable Bull of the Antichrist, therefore calling the Pope the Antichrist. And he burnt a copy of the Bull on December 16th, 1520.

In 1521, Emperor Charles V had also become fed up with Luther, and so he summoned him. The meeting took place at an imperial council. The imperial council was known as the Diet and Worms pronounced in English "Worms," and so was the Diet of Worms my favorite name for any event ever anywhere.

In the end, he stood before the Emperor and refused to recant. Can you imagine being the leader of the Holy Roman Empire and having some priest refused to obey your order? This was intolerable. Charles issued the imperial ban against Luther. This made Luther an outlaw, a wanted man, subject to being executed on site by anyone.

Fredrick the Wise was fearful that Luther's life was in grave danger. And so, he staged a kidnapping, and had Luther abducted on his way home from Worms and had him taken into protective custody at the Wartburg, a Castle in the town of Eisenach. He spent his time at the Wartburg Castle working on a translation of the New Testament of the Bible, translating it from the original Greek into German.

His translation of the New Testament was published in September of 1523, and is known to us now as the September Testament. It's on view in the next room of the exhibition. In 1523, an event occurred whose significance Luther didn't fully appreciate at the time.

A young woman from an impoverished noble family had been sent to a convent at the age of 5, and had eventually become a nun. She and other members of the convent had listened to Luther's arguments about the proper place of the faithful in the world. And she decided that it was time to leave the convent.

In 1523, Katharina von Bora and some of her friends escaped from their convent by hiding in empty herring barrels that were being carted away, and came to Wittenberg. It quickly became apparent that there was a need to find husbands for these escaped nuns.

Katharina was a choosy one. She really had her eyes on Luther. And in 1525, Martin Luther and Katharina von Bora were married, and Lucas Cranach served as the witness.
