---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/5
type: stop
section_title: 'Sculptures of Aurore, Serpentine and Two Women'
title: 'Sculptures of Aurore, Serpentine and Two Women'
stop_id: 5
audio_file: 005.mp3
colors:
  green:
    file: 005G
    name: 'The Serpentine'
    speaker: 'Jay Fisher'
  red:
    file: 005R
    name: 'Reclining Nude I (Aurore)'
    speaker: 'Jay Fisher'
  yellow:
    file: 005Y
    name: 'Two Women'
    speaker: 'Jay Fisher'
---

## Male Speaker 1

Again, here is Jay Fisher of the Baltimore Museum of Art with commentary on the three sculptures of women grouped together in this room.

## Jay Fisher

Now why Matisse made sculpture is that it helped him to paint.  The fact that he could make modeling figure tangible, so to literally get his hands around it, it made him understand how to paint a figure in a painting.

## Henri Matisse

I took up sculpture because what interested me in painting was a clarification of my ideas.  I changed my method and worked in clay in order to have a rest from painting, in which I had done absolutely all that I could for the time being.  That is to say that it was done for the purpose of organization, to put order into my feelings to find [Indiscernible][0:00:52] to suit me.  And when I found it in sculpture, it helped me in my painting.  It was always in view of a complete possession of my mind, a sort of hierarchy of all my sensations, that I kept working in the hope of finding an ultimate conclusion.

## Jay Fisher

Matisse is totally integrated and so in that way, it all works together.  A Matisse moves from one medium to the next to find the best way that he can learn and develop his ideas.  He does different things with drawing too.  If there is a drawing that's linear, he is trying to explore one thing.  If he decides to use charcoal and model it, model volume with in light and dark, [Indiscernible][0:01:39] then it's about something else.  It's about modeling three-dimensional form, so he can move from looking at a figure as a silhouette to one that's modeled as a volume.  And he knows the best medium to play with, depending on what he's trying to inform his vision.

## Male Speaker 1

Choose the green button to listen to Jay Fisher discuss the sculpture of the standing woman called The Serpentine.  For tips on viewing the Reclining Nude sculpture Of Aurora press the red button.  To learn about the cultural of the Two Standing Women, select the yellow button.
